Lionel work ex 4 (#22)
mitre/fhir-exercises: Exercise_4/docs/part-3.md

# Part 3: Implementation Guides and US Core

## Background on FHIR
**The HL7® FHIR® (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources) standard defines both the method and structure for HOW healthcare information can be exchanged between different systems regardless of how it is stored in those systems.**

It allows healthcare information, including clinical and administrative data, 
to be available securely to those who have a need to access it, and to those who have the right to do so for the benefit of a patient receiving care. 

> The FHIR® standard is developed and maintained by the HL7® (Health Level Seven®) organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FHIR® standard is developed and maintained by the Health Level Seven® (HL7®) organization.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HL7 FHIR is a robust and comprehensive standard, but for the purposes of this tutorial here is a very simplified view.

- FHIR defines a set of **Resources** that can be exchanged.
  - These Resources are structured data building blocks that group together commonly used and related data fields.
  - Examples of Resources are things like Patient, Encounter, Condition, AllergyIntolerance, Medication, Procedure, and Observation. Some of these concepts should be familiar from Part 1. FHIR defines over 140 resources.
- FHIR also defines an **Application Programming Interface (API)*** which is a way for applications to programmatically query and request data Resource by Resource.

While FHIR defines these Resources and API, it also specifies that a large majority of the features are optional.

A lot of optionality can be a good thing, but with exchanging health data for a particular use-case, that optionality and flexibility allows for too much ambiguity and differences. Therefore, the FHIR community also develops **Implementation Guides** to specify exactly how FHIR should be used for many real-world use-cases.
```

> More information and an overview can be found here: [https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/2019-08/ONCFHIRFSWhatIsFHIR.pdf](https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/2019-08/ONCFHIRFSWhatIsFHIR.pdf)

!!! note "Additional Information Available"
    Please note, NIH has created a webinar and associated interactive workshop focused specifically on the FHIR® standard.  
    (Once the Webinar and Workshop are fully released and available, this section will be updated to link to specific elements).

## How Implementation Guides (IG) are developed

### Introducing Implementation Guides
A principal challenge for healthcare standards is how to handle the wide variability caused by diverse healthcare processes. Over time, more fields and optionality are added to the specification, gradually adding cost and complexity to the resulting implementations. The alternative is relying on custom extensions, but these create many implementation problems too.

> FHIR® solves this challenge by **defining a simple framework for extending the existing resources to encompass new information** and describe their use with Profiles. All systems that are FHIR-enabled can read all resources provided in a data exchange, but applications can add more control and meaning using profiles. 

Reviewer: Seems like `Profile` should be a defined term.

    * US Core CareTeam Profile
    * US Core Condition Profile
    * US Core DiagnosticReport Profile for Laboratory Results Reporting
    * US Core DiagnosticReport Profile for Report and Note exchange
    * US Core DocumentReference Profile
    * US Core Encounter Profile
    * US Core Goal Profile
    * US Core Head Circumference Profile
    * US Core Heart Rate Profile
    * US Core Immunization Profile
    * US Core Implantable Device Profile
    * US Core Laboratory Result Observation Profile
    * US Core Location Profile
    * US Core Medication Profile
    * US Core MedicationRequest Profile
    * US Core Organization Profile
    * US Core Patient Profile
    * US Core Pediatric BMI for Age Observation Profile
    * US Core Pediatric Head Occipital-frontal Circumference Percentile Profile
    * US Core Pediatric Weight for Height Observation Profile
    * US Core Practitioner Profile
    * US Core PractitionerRole Profile
    * US Core Procedure Profile
    * US Core Provenance Profile
    * US Core Pulse Oximetry Profile
    * US Core Respiratory Rate Profile
    * **US Core Smoking Status Observation Profile**
    * US Core Vital Signs Profile

> You may have noticed that **SMOKING STATUS** again! It was in the EHR data we saw, and it was in the USCDI criteria... we’ll revisit this example soon...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you looked at the complete list of US Core Profiles, you may have noticed **SMOKING STATUS** again! It was in the EHR data we saw, and it was in the USCDI criteria... we’ll revisit this example soon...
```

### IG navigation example by detailed US Core walkthrough

Let’s look specifically at the US Core Medication Profile here.
![uscore_medications](img/uscore_medications.png)

We can see details of the elements of the medication profile: [http://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/US-Core/StructureDefinition-us-core-medication.html](http://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/US-Core/StructureDefinition-us-core-medication.html)

??? question "Knowledge Check: Which element(s) of this profile must be supported in order to be US Core Compliant?"

>     `Medication.code` element

Reviewer: Here you make a knowledge check without explaining the Profile view, that each field has a:
- name
- flags (including "Is Modifier", "Is Summary", "Is Must Support")
- cardinality
- data type
- description and constraints

We need to explain what they are seeing before you ask them what they saw.

> Going back to our **smoking example** take a look here: HL7.FHIR.US.CORE\US Core Smoking Status Observation Profile - FHIR® v4.0.1 [https://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/StructureDefinition-us-core-smokingstatus.html#:~:text=Resource%20Profile%3A%20US%20Core%20Smoking%20Status%20Observation%20Profile,as%20of%202019-05-21T00%3A00%3A00%2B00%3A00%20%204%20more%20rows%20](https://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/StructureDefinition-us-core-smokingstatus.html#:~:text=Resource%20Profile%3A%20US%20Core%20Smoking%20Status%20Observation%20Profile,as%20of%202019-05-21T00%3A00%3A00%2B00%3A00%20%204%20more%20rows%20)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going back to our **smoking example** take a look here: [http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5/StructureDefinition-us-core-smokingstatus.html#mandatory-and-must-support-data-elements](http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5/StructureDefinition-us-core-smokingstatus.html#mandatory-and-must-support-data-elements)
```

    7 required elements. They include a `status`, a category code of `social-history`, a code for smoking observation, a patient, when the observation occurred, a result value code for smoking status

??? question "Knowledge Check: Where would I find the reference ID of the patient?"
    `Subject code`

Let’s take a look at the raw unformatted **JSON code** for the resource:

??? note "Sample JSON code of the Smoking Resource"
    {
    "resourceType": "Observation",
    "id": "056f4fe8-cd0a-db01-9d8b-0b3bf098368c",
    "meta": {
        "profile": [ "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/StructureDefinition/us-core-smokingstatus" ]
    },
    "status": "final",
    "category": [{
        "coding": [{
            "system": "http://terminology.hl7.org/CodeSystem/observation-category",
            "code": "social-history",
            "display": "social-history"
        }]
    }],
    "code": {
        "coding": [{
        "system": "http://loinc.org",
        "code": "72166-2",
        "display": "Tobacco smoking status NHIS"
        }],
        "text": "Tobacco smoking status NHIS"
    },
    "subject": { "reference": "urn:uuid:c37a6b5c-a13c-835d-bfe2-e215df91cb3c" },

>     "encounter": { "reference": "urn:uuid:0f7f8554-0896-65dd-7bed-fe85762791dd" },

Reviewer: Maybe we should format this with ` ```JSON`

    "effectiveDateTime": "2012-07-25T10:07:28-04:00",
    "issued": "2012-07-25T10:07:28.029-04:00",
    "valueCodeableConcept": {
        "coding": [{
        "system": "http://snomed.info/sct",
        "code": "266919005",
        "display": "Never smoker"
        }],
        "text": "Never smoker"
    }
    }

> Check out this patient profile here: HL7.FHIR.US.CORE\Some Day Smoker Example - JSON Representation - FHIR® v4.0.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out this patient profile here: [HL7.FHIR.US.CORE\Some Day Smoker Example - JSON Representation](http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5/Observation-some-day-smoker.json.html)
```

??? question "Knowledge Check: What is the name of the patient"
    Amy Shaw
??? question "Knowledge Check: Is she a smoker and if so, what kind?"

>     Current smoker

Reviewer: These are confusing because the questions are about the "Some Day Smoker Example" linked above, but the sample JSON immediately above that link has different values!

!!! check "Additional Resources:"
    * Video from the HL7 FHIR® Connectathon features hands-on FHIR® development and testing. Implementers and developers can gain hands-on experience developing FHIR-based solutions by participating in one of many tracks. [https://vimeo.com/542197402/8fb80fea04](https://vimeo.com/542197402/8fb80fea04)

!!! check "Key Point: Why this matters:"

>     **Researchers accessing data made available through the FHIR® standard are almost guaranteed to encounter novel implementations based on the particulars of the system they are accessing. The US Core IG, however, serves as a foundational set of data researchers can almost always count on to be present. Knowing this IG will empower one to have a foundational grasp on any data accessed.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Researchers accessing data through the FHIR® standard are almost guaranteed to encounter novel implementations based on the particulars of the system they are accessing. The US Core IG, however, serves as a baseline researchers will be able to depend on for United States-based EHR data. Familiarity with the US Core IG provides a foundational grasp of available data.**
```
